Monoclonal anti-endothelial cell antibodies from a patient with Takayasu arteritis activate endothelial cells from large vessels. 
OBJECTIVE: To create monoclonal anti-endothelial cell antibodies (mAECA) from a patient with Takayasu arteritis to evaluate their ability to activate human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), and to characterize the mechanism of EC activation. METHODS: A panel of mAECA was generated from peripheral blood lymphocytes of a patient with Takayasu arteritis, using Epstein-Barr virus transformation. Activity against macrovascular EC (HUVEC) and microvascular EC (human bone marrow EC immortalized by SV40) antigens was detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Inhibition studies were used to select the monoclonal antibodies (mAECA) which share the same EC epitope binding specificity as the total IgG-AECA from the Takayasu arteritis patient. The binding of the mAECA to human aortic EC was studied by immunohistochemistry. The secretion levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and von Willebrand factor (vWF) were determined, to serve as markers for EC activation. The activated EC were examined for the adherence of a monocytic cell line (U937), as well as for expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1, and E-selectin. In addition, nuclear extracts of the mAECA-treated EC were analyzed for the induction of translocation of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB), using a specific NF-kappaB oligoprobe in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. RESULTS: Six mAECA were selected, the mixture of which produced 100% inhibition of binding of the original IgG (from the patient with Takayasu arteritis) to HUVEC. All mAECA possessed high activity against macrovascular EC, but none had significant antimicrovascular EC activity. The mAECA, but not normal human IgG, had anti-human aortic EC activity. Four of the 6 mAECA activated EC, manifested by increased IL-6 and vWF secretion. The 4 mAECA induced EC expression of adhesion molecules and increased adhesion of U937 monocytic cells to EC. In addition, these mAECA stimulated the nuclear translocation of the NF-kappaB transcription factor. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that AECA may directly stimulate EC in Takayasu arteritis through elevation of adhesion molecule expression associated with NF-kappaB activation and adhesion of monocytes, and may therefore play a pathogenic role in the development of the vasculopathy in Takayasu arteritis. 