Sox6 Directly Silences Epsilon Globin Expression in Definitive Erythropoiesis 
Sox6 is a member of the Sox transcription factor family that is defined by the conserved high mobility group (HMG) DNA binding domain, first described in the testis determining gene, Sry. Previous studies have suggested that Sox6 plays a role in the development of the central nervous system, cartilage, and muscle. In the Sox6-deficient mouse, p100H, epsilony globin is persistently expressed, and increased numbers of nucleated red cells are present in the fetal circulation. Transfection assays in GM979 (erythroleukemic) cells define a 36-base pair region of the epsilony proximal promoter that is critical for Sox6 mediated repression. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrate that Sox6 acts as a repressor by directly binding to the epsilony promoter. The normal expression of Sox6 in wild-type fetal liver and the ectopic expression of epsilony in p100H homozygous fetal liver demonstrate that Sox6 functions in definitive erythropoiesis. The present study shows that Sox6 is required for silencing of epsilony globin in definitive erythropoiesis and suggests a role for Sox6 in erythroid cell maturation. Thus, Sox6 regulation of epsilony globin might provide a novel therapeutical target in the treatment of hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia. 
Synopsis
Beta-globin gene switching-the transition from embryonic to fetal to adult synthesis of specific globin chains-results in hemoglobins with different affinity for oxygen. This system is a longstanding paradigm for developmental biology and is directly relevant to human disease, since small amounts of normal embryonic or fetal beta-globins can "balance" the detrimental effect of abnormal or missing adult globins in diseases such as sickle cell anemia and beta-thalassemia. 
In the current study, the transcription factor Sox6 was identified as a novel and crucial silencing factor of epsilon (embryonic) globin through a somewhat serendipitous pathway. The authors had previously identified a chromosomal inversion, p100H, by virtue of its effect on the pink-eyed dilution gene and found that the same inversion also disrupts the Sox6 gene. Using p100H mutant mice as a tool for identifying downstream targets of Sox6, the authors discovered that epsilon-globin levels were dramatically elevated, paving the way for a series of molecular genetic experiments demonstrating that Sox6 directly binds to and normally inhibits transcription from the epsilon-globin gene promoter. This work provides fundamental new insights into regulation of globin gene transcription during development, and provides new clues for manipulating globin gene transcription as an approach to treat human blood diseases. 
