Jeg-3 human choriocarcinoma-induced immunosuppression: downregulation of interleukin-2, interleukin-2 receptor alpha-chain, and its Jak/Stat signaling pathway. 
PROBLEM: The mechanisms of the immunosuppressive and immunosuppression-inducing capacities of Jeg-3 human choriocarcinoma cell line supernatants (HCSs) are not yet completely understood. The influence on interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4 and interferon (IFN)-gamma production; IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) alpha-, beta-, and gamma-chain; and the signaling pathway molecules Janus kinase (Jak)1, Jak3, signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat)1, Stat3, and Stat5 should be investigated. METHOD OF STUDY: For assessment of IL production, whole peripheral venous blood from healthy donors was stimulated with phorbol-myristate-acetate and ionomycine. Secretion of ILs was blocked with monensine. Intracellular ILs were analyzed by flow cytometry. For IL-2R and signaling pathway molecule analysis, peripheral blood lymphocytes were stimulated with phytohemagglutinin (PHA). IL-2R chains were measured by flow cytometry, and Jaks/Stats by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and Western blot. RESULTS: Phorbol-myristate-acetate and ionomycine strongly increase the percent-age of IL-2+ cells; an additional 50% HCSs significantly suppresses the percentage to, or below the level of unstimulated cells. IFN-gamma production is strongly decreased by HCSs in some cases, but not in others. PHA stimulates IL-2R alpha-, beta-, and gamma-chain expression and their signaling pathway molecules Jak1, Jak3, Stat1, Stat3, and Stat5. 50% HCS downregulates the alpha-chain and slightly upregulates the beta-chain. Jak1, Jak3, Stat1, Stat3, and Stat5 expression is suppressed approximately to, or below the level of unstimulated cells. CONCLUSIONS: HCS forcefully blocks the production of IL-2; the IL-2R alpha-chain; and Jak1, Jak3, Stat1, Stat3, and Stat5 expression. The observed phenomena might be caused by downregulation of an IL-2R regulation gene, and might play a key role in the expansion of choriocarcinoma, and possibly in the survival of the fetal allograft. 