Comparative analysis identifies conserved tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3 binding sites in the human and simian Epstein-Barr virus oncogene LMP1. 
Nonhuman primates are naturally infected with a B-lymphotropic herpesvirus closely related to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). These simian EBV share considerable genetic, biologic, and epidemiologic features with human EBV, including virus-induced tumorigenesis. However, latent, transformation-associated viral genes demonstrate marked sequence divergence among species despite the conserved functions. We have cloned the latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) homologs from the simian EBV naturally infecting baboons (cercopithicine herpesvirus 12, herpesvirus papio) and rhesus monkeys (cercopithicine herpesvirus 15) for a comparative study with the human EBV oncogene. The transmembrane domains are well conserved, but there is striking sequence divergence of the carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic domain essential for B-cell immortalization and interaction with the tumor necrosis factor receptor signaling pathway. Nevertheless, the simian EBV LMP1s retain most functions in common with EBV LMP1, including the ability to induce NF-(kappa)B activity in human cells, to bind the tumor necrosis factor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3) in vitro, and to induce expression of tumor necrosis factor-responsive genes, such as ICAM1, in human B lymphocytes. Multiple TRAF3 binding sites containing a PXQXT/S core sequence can be identified in the simian EBV LMP1s by an in vitro binding assay. A PXQXT/S-containing sequence is also present in the cytoplasmic domain of the Hodgkin's disease marker, CD30, and binds TRAF3 in vitro. The last 13 amino acids containing a PXQXT/S sequence are highly conserved in human and simian EBV LMP1 but do not bind TRAF3, suggesting a distinct role for this conserved region of LMP1. The conserved TRAF3 binding sites in LMP1 and the CD30 Hodgkin's disease marker provides further evidence that a TRAF3-mediated signal transduction pathway may be important in malignant transformation. 