Retinoid X receptor (RXR) agonist-induced activation of dominant-negative RXR-retinoic acid receptor alpha403 heterodimers is developmentally regulated during myeloid differentiation. 
The multiple biologic activities of retinoic acid (RA) are mediated through RAR and retinoid X receptor (RXR) nuclear receptors that interact with specific DNA target sequences as heterodimers (RXR-RAR) or homodimers (RXR-RXR). RA receptor activation appears critical to regulating important aspects of hematopoiesis, since transducing a COOH-terminally truncated RARalpha exhibiting dominant-negative activity (RARalpha403) into normal mouse bone marrow generates hematopoietic growth factor-dependent cell lines frozen at the multipotent progenitor (EML) or committed promyelocyte (MPRO) stages. Nevertheless, relatively high, pharmacological concentrations of RA (1 to 10 &mgr;M) overcome these differentiation blocks and induce terminal granulocytic differentiation of the MPRO promyelocytes while potentiating interleukin-3 (IL-3)-induced commitment of EML cells to the granulocyte/monocyte lineage. In the present study, we utilized RXR- and RAR-specific agonists and antagonists to determine how RA overcomes the dominant-negative activity of the truncated RARalpha in these different myeloid developmental stages. Unexpectedly, we observed that an RXR-specific, rather than an RAR-specific, agonist induces terminal granulocytic differentiation of MPRO promyelocytes, and this differentiation is associated with activation of DNA response elements corresponding to RAR-RXR heterodimers rather than RXR-RXR homodimers. This RXR agonist activity is blocked by RAR-specific antagonists, suggesting extensive cross-talk between the partners of the RXR -RARalpha403 heterodimer. In contrast, in the more immature, multipotent EML cells we observed that this RXR-specific agonist is inactive either in potentiating IL-3-mediated commitment of EML cells to the granulocyte lineage or in transactivating RAR-RXR response elements. RA- triggered GALdbd-RARalpha hybrid activity in these cells indicates that the multipotent EML cells harbor substantial nuclear hormone receptor coactivator activity. However, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A readily activates an RXR-RAR reporter construct in the multipotent EML cells but not in the committed MPRO promyelocytes, indicating that differences in HDAC-containing repressor complexes in these two closely related but distinct hematopoietic lineages might account for the differential activation of the RXR-RARalpha403 heterodimers that we observed at these different stages of myeloid development. 