In vivo modulation of glucocorticoid receptor mRNA by inhaled fluticasone propionate in bronchial mucosa and blood lymphocytes in subjects with mild asthma. 
BACKGROUND: In vivo regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) by glucocorticoids provides a means of modulating sensitivity of targeted cells. OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the in vivo modulation of GR mRNA expression by fluticasone propionate (FP) in subjects with mild asthma. METHODS: Ten atopic asthmatic subjects were treated with FP 250 microg twice daily for 4 weeks. Before and after treatment, the patients underwent fiberoptic bronchoscopy with endobronchial biopsy and sampling of venous blood for measurements of GR mRNA levels. A solution hybridization assay was used for quantitative analysis of GR mRNA. In addition, a 24-hour urinary cortisol excretion and an adrenocorticotropic hormone test before and after treatment with FP were performed. RESULTS: A high interindividual variation in GR mRNA expression was seen. However, we detected a significant reduction of the GR mRNA levels in the endobronchial biopsy specimens after FP treatment (36.6 +/- 23.1 and 25.0 +/- 10.9 amol GR mRNA/microg RNA, respectively; P <.01). In the peripheral blood lymphocytes an even more striking downregulation of the GR by its cognate ligand was documented (30.3 +/- 26.5 and 8.8 +/- 5 amol GR mRNA/microg RNA, respectively; P <.001), possibly reflecting differences in glucocorticoid sensitivity between tissues. A small but significant reduction of the 24-hour urinary cortisol excretion was observed (233 +/- 109 and 157 +/- 66 nmol/L, respectively; P <.01), whereas the feedback regulation of glucocorticoid synthesis by means of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis as assessed by the adrenocorticotropic hormone test remained normal after treatment with FP. CONCLUSION: The results in this study confirm the potency of the inhaled corticosteroid FP and provide evidence for a considerable tissue-specific interindividual variation in the expression of the GR. 