Introduction
Immunological tolerance to self-antigens is the result of the deletion of self-reactive T lymphocytes in the thymus (central tolerance) and suppression of the activation of potentially self-reactive T lymphocytes in the periphery (peripheral tolerance) [1]. Suppression of pathogenic T cell responses is mediated by naturally arising CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells (Tregs) [2,3]. Deficiencies in Treg development and function have been linked to the severe autoimmune disorder known as immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome (IPEX) [4]. In addition, recent studies have provided strong evidence that dysregulation of Treg development and/or function may be a significant factor in the pathogenesis of several autoimmune disorders (e.g., multiple sclerosis [5], myasthenia gravis [6], and type 1 diabetes [7]) and virus-induced immunologic disorders (e.g., human T lymphotropic virus type I [HTLV-I]-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis [HAM/TSP], and HIV-induced AIDS [8-10]). 
The transcription factor Foxp3 is a 431-amino acid (48-kDa) protein expressed at very high levels in CD4+CD25hi T cells and has previously been shown to be absolutely critical for Treg development and function [11-14]. Foxp3 contains a proline-rich amino-terminal domain reported to function as a nuclear factor of activated T cells (NF-AT) and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) binding domain, a central region containing a zinc finger and leucine zipper potentially important for protein-protein interactions, and a carboxyl-terminal forkhead (FKH) domain required for nuclear localization and DNA-binding activity [14-16]. Functional inactivation of Foxp3 by genetic mutations affecting the Foxp3 coding region, as demonstrated in IPEX, or repression of Foxp3 expression by the HTLV-I-encoded transactivator protein Tax, as recently reported in patients with HAM/TSP, results in loss of regulatory activity in CD4+CD25hi T cells [4,8,17]. Although it is clear that Foxp3 regulates T cell proliferation and cytokine production, very little is known concerning the molecular mechanisms of Foxp3 function. 
The first evidence to indicate how Foxp3 promotes the development and function of regulatory T cells came from a report by Ziegler and colleagues [16], which suggested that Foxp3 could inhibit transcriptional activation by physically interacting with forkhead binding sites located immediately adjacent to critical cis-acting NF-AT binding sites found in various cytokine promoters (e.g., IL-2 promoter). That study also demonstrated that Foxp3 could repress activation of a synthetic reporter vector containing an SV40 promoter and three tandem copies of a forkhead binding site. These results provided additional evidence suggesting that Foxp3 transcriptional repression was mediated by binding in a sequence-specific manner to promoters containing forkhead binding sites. A recent study by Bettelli and colleagues [15] further demonstrated that Foxp3 could inhibit NF-AT as well as NF-kappaB activation, although the mechanism of suppression was shown to involve direct protein-protein interactions between NF-AT or NF-kappaB and Foxp3 rather than binding of Foxp3 to promoter elements adjacent to cis-acting NF-AT or NF-kappaB sites. Collectively, these data suggested that Foxp3 may function as a transcriptional repressor, potentially through the formation of both DNA-protein and protein-protein interactions. 
In the present study, we expanded upon these observations by defining additional requirements of Foxp3-mediated repression of NF-kappaB activation, and investigated whether Foxp3 could target additional signaling pathways by examining transcriptional activation of NF-kappaB-dependent and NF-kappaB-independent retroviral pathogens. The characterization of the molecular targets of Foxp3 and the mechanism(s) utilized by Foxp3 to support Treg development and function will aid in our understanding of the role Tregs play in the pathogenesis of human autoimmune disease. 
