Nonpituitary human prolactin gene transcription is independent of Pit-1 and differentially controlled in lymphocytes and in endometrial stroma. 
Expression of the human PRL (hPRL) gene in extrapituitary sites such as the uterus (decidualized endometrial stroma and myometrium) and cells of the hematopoietic lineage is directed by an alternative promoter which is located approximately 6 kilobases (kb) upstream of the pituitary-specific start site. In order to delineate the tissue-specific mechanisms governing the control of nonpituitary PRL gene expression, we have cloned and sequenced 3 kb 5'-flanking DNA of the upstream decidual/lymphoid (dPRL) promoter. Based on sequence homology we identified two binding motifs for Pit-1 and seven half-sites for glucocorticoid receptor/progesterone receptor (PR) binding. We focused our studies on the role of Pit-1 and of PR as potential transcriptional regulators, since the POU domain protein Pit-1 is essential in the control of pituitary PRL expression, and progesterone induces decidual transformation of the endometrial stroma, a differentiation process during which the decidual PRL gene is activated. We demonstrate in a variety of cell types, including lymphocytes and endometrial stroma, that Pit-1 is not involved in the regulation of dPRL promoter/reporter gene constructs carrying 3 kb 5'-flanking DNA. Our experiments also show that activated PR does not confer direct transcriptional control on the dPRL promoter. When we compared the activity of the transfected dPRL promoter in PRL-secreting and nonsecreting lymphoid cells, we found that the 3 kb 5'-flanking region of the dPRL promoter did not contain elements restricting expression to only those lymphocytes that produce PRL but allowed expression of fusion reporter genes irrespective of the status of the endogenous PRL gene. This was in sharp contrast to endometrial cells where 3 kb 5'-flanking DNA conferred strong transcriptional activation on the dPRL promoter in decidualized endometrial stromal cells actively secreting PRL, but did not allow transcription in undifferentiated non-PRL-secreting endometrial stromal cells. Activation of the dPRL promoter construct in these undifferentiated cells could however be induced by the addition of cAMP, in the absence of progesterone, suggesting that a signal transduced through the cAMP signaling pathway is a primary inducer of decidual PRL gene expression. 