alpha-Tocopheryl succinate inhibits monocytic cell adhesion to endothelial cells by suppressing NF-kappa B mobilization. 
The adherence of monocytes to activated endothelium is an early event in atherogenesis. Because antioxidants have been considered to be of antiatherosclerotic potential, we investigated the effects of alpha-tocopherol (TCP) and its acetate and succinate esters on monocyte adhesion to cytokine-stimulated human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Endothelial cells were treated with TCP, alpha-tocopherol acetate (TCP acetate), or alpha-tocopheryl succinate (TCP succinate) before stimulation with tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha; 10 U/ml, 6 h) or interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta; 10 U/ml, 6 h). Cytokine-stimulated cell surface expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1, CD106) and E-selectin (ELAM-1, CD62E), but not of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1, CD54), was time- and dose-dependently inhibited by TCP succinate but not by TCP or TCP acetate. TCP succinate (200 microM, 24 h) reduced TNF-induced VCAM-1 and E-selectin expression from a specific mean fluorescence intensity of 151 +/- 28 to 12 +/- 4 channels and from 225 +/- 38 to 79 +/- 21 channels, respectively. Succinate alone had no effect. Decreased adhesion molecule expression was associated with a reduction of monocytic cell adhesion. TCP succinate (20 microM, 72 h), but not TCP (200 microM, 72 h), reduced U-937 cell adhesion to TNF-alpha-stimulated (10 U/ml, 6 h) HUVEC by 30% (P < 0.025) and to IL-1 beta-stimulated HUVEC by 56% (P < 0.010). Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays of HUVEC nuclear proteins revealed a decrease in TNF-alpha-stimulated nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B) activation after pretreatment of HUVEC with TCP succinate but not with TCP, TCP acetate, or succinate alone. In conclusion, we demonstrate that the vitamin E derivative TCP succinate prevents monocytic cell adhesion to cytokine-stimulated endothelial cells by inhibiting the activation of NF-kappa B, further emphasizing the antiatherosclerotic potential of lipid soluble antioxidants. 