CD14-mediated translocation of nuclear factor-kappa B induced by lipopolysaccharide does not require tyrosine kinase activity. 
During the course of serious bacterial infections, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is believed to interact with macrophage receptors, resulting in the generation of inflammatory mediators and systemic symptoms including hemodynamic instability and shock. CD14, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked antigen, functions as an LPS signaling receptor. A critical issue concerns the mechanism by which CD14, which has no transmembrane domain, transduces its signal following LPS binding. Recently, investigators have hypothesized that CD14-mediated signaling is effected through a receptor-associated tyrosine kinase (TK), suggesting a multicomponent receptor model of LPS signaling. Wild-type Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)-K1 cells can be activated by endotoxin to release arachidonate following transfection with human CD14 (CHO/CD14). Nuclear translocation of cytosolic NF-kappa B is correlated with a number of LPS-inducible responses. We sought to determine if this pathway were present in CHO/CD14 cells and to elucidate the relationship of NF-kappa B activation to the CD14 receptor system. LPS-stimulated translocation of NF-kappa B in CHO/CD14 cells resembled the same response in the murine macrophage-like cell line RAW 264.7. Protein synthesis inhibitors and corticosteroids, which suppress arachidonate release and the synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines, had no effect on translocation of NF-kappa B in CHO/CD14 or RAW 264.7 cells, demonstrating that NF-kappa B translocation is an early event. Although TK activity was consistently observed by immunoblotting extracts from activated RAW 264.7 cells, LPS-induced phosphotyrosine residues were not observed from similarly treated CHO/CD14 cells. Furthermore, the TK inhibitors herbimycin A and genistein failed to inhibit translocation of NF-kappa B in CHO/CD14 or RAW 264.7 cells, although both of these agents inhibited LPS-induced TK activity in RAW 264.7 cells. These results imply that TK activity is not obligatory for CD14-mediated signal transduction to occur in response to LPS. 