LPS-Induced NF-kappaB activation and TNF-alpha release in human monocytes are protein tyrosine kinase dependent and protein kinase C independent. 
BACKGROUND: Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) is an important mediator of septic shock. Endotoxin (LPS) signal transduction in human monocytes leads to activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) and TNF-alpha release. Previous studies have implicated activation of both protein kinase C (PKC) and protein tyrosine kinases (PTK) in LPS-induced NF-kappaB activation and TNF-alpha production. We hypothesized that inhibition of either PKC or PTK would decrease LPS-induced NF-kappaB DNA binding and TNF-alpha release in human monocytes. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human monocytes were stimulated with PMA (50 ng/ml) alone or LPS (100 ng/ml) with and without a nonspecific serine/threonine protein kinase inhibitor staurosporine (Stauro), a specific pan-PKC inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide (Bis), or an inhibitor of PTK genistein (Gen). TNF-alpha release in culture supernatants was measured by an ELISA. NF-kappaB DNA binding was evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. RESULTS: LPS increased NF-kappaB DNA binding and TNF-alpha release in human monocytes. Nonspecific protein kinase inhibition inhibited NF-kappaB activation and TNF-alpha release, while specific PKC inhibition with Bis had no effect on LPS-induced NF-kappaB DNA binding or TNF-alpha release. PTK inhibition with Gen attenuated both LPS-induced NF-kappaB DNA binding and TNF-alpha production in human monocytes. Direct activation of PKC with PMA induced both NF-kappaB activation and TNF-alpha production by human monocytes. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that LPS-induced NF-kappaB activation and TNF-alpha release in human monocytes are independent of PKC activity. Furthermore, our results provide evidence that PTK plays a role in LPS-induced NF-kappaB activation and TNF-alpha release in human monocytes and thus could be a potential therapeutic target in inflammatory states. Copyright 1999 Academic Press. 