Anoxia/reoxygenation-induced tolerance with respect to polymorphonuclear leukocyte adhesion to cultured endothelial cells. A nuclear factor-kappaB-mediated phenomenon. 
Exposing human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) to anoxia/reoxygenation (A/R) results in an increase in polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) adhesion to HUVECs. This A/R-induced hyperadhesion is completely prevented by a previous (24 hours earlier) exposure of HUVECs to A/R. This phenomenon has been termed "A/R tolerance." Exposing HUVECs to A/R induces an increase in nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) in HUVEC nuclei within 4 hours. Interfering with either NF-kappaB activation (proteasome inhibitor) or translocation (double-stranded oligonucleotides containing NF-kappaB binding sequence) prevents the development of A/R tolerance (ie, the increase in A/R-induced PMN adhesion to HUVECs is the same after the first and second A/R challenges). NO production by HUVECs is increased after the second A/R challenge, but not after the first A/R challenge. Inhibition of NO synthase (NOS) during the second A/R challenge prevents the development of A/R tolerance with respect to PMN adhesion. However, while HUVECs contained endothelial NOS protein, no inducible NOS was detected in either tolerant or nontolerant cells. Further studies indicated that inhibition of GTP-cyclohydrolase I (an enzyme involved in de novo synthesis of an important cofactor for NOS activity, tetrahydrobiopterin) prevented the generation of NO in A/R-tolerant cells. Extracellular generation of NO (NO donor) did not effect the hyperadhesion response induced by the initial A/R challenge. A/R also induced an oxidant stress in naive HUVECs, but not in A/R-tolerant HUVECs. Inhibition of NOS during the second A/R insult results in the generation of an oxidant stress similar to that observed after the first A/R challenge. Taken together, the findings of the present study are consistent with a role for NF-kappaB in the development of A/R tolerance (with respect to PMN adhesion), perhaps by transcriptional regulation of GTP-cyclohydrolase. The increased NO production during the second A/R insult reduces PMN adhesion most likely by reducing the intracellular oxidant stress induced by A/R. 