Anti-Ehrlichia chaffeensis antibody complexed with E. chaffeensis induces potent proinflammatory cytokine mRNA expression in human monocytes through sustained reduction of IkappaB-alpha and activation of NF-kappaB. 
Ehrlichia chaffeensis is an obligatory intracellular bacterium that infects monocytes and macrophages and is the etiologic agent of human ehrlichiosis in the United States. Our previous studies showed that the exposure of human monocytes to E. chaffeensis induces the expression of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), IL-8, and IL-10 genes in vitro but not the expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and IL-6 mRNAs. In this study, the effect of anti-E. chaffeensis antibody complexed with E. chaffeensis on the expression of major proinflammatory cytokines in human monocytes was examined. Human monocytic cell line THP-1 was treated with E. chaffeensis which had been preincubated with human anti-E. chaffeensis serum for 2 h, and the levels of cytokine mRNAs were evaluated by competitive reverse transcription-PCR. Anti-E. chaffeensis antibody complexed with E. chaffeensis significantly enhanced mRNA expression of IL-1beta in THP-1 cells. The expression of TNF-alpha and IL-6 mRNAs was also induced. The levels of secreted IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and IL-6 during 24 h of stimulation were comparable to those induced by Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide at 1 microg/ml. Fab fragment of anti-E. chaffeensis immunoglobulin G complexed with E. chaffeensis did not induce any of these three cytokines, indicating that ehrlichial binding is required for IL-1beta mRNA expression and that binding of the immune complex to the Fc gamma receptor is required for TNF-alpha and IL-6 mRNA expression and enhanced IL-1beta mRNA expression. Furthermore, prolonged degradation of IkappaB-alpha and activation of NF-kappaB were demonstrated in THP-1 cells exposed to anti-E. chaffeensis serum and E. chaffeensis. This result implies that development of anti-E. chaffeensis antibody in patients can result in the production of major proinflammatory cytokines, which may play an important role in the pathophysiology of ehrlichiosis and immune responses to it. 